Dataframe ownership (#1742)
JuliaData/DataFrames.jl: docs/src/lib/types.md

interfaces defined by [Tables.jl](https://github.com/JuliaData/Tables.jl/) instead.

`DataFrame` is the most fundamental subtype of `AbstractDataFrame`, which stores a set of columns

> as `AbstractVector` objects. When a `DataFrame` is constructed columns *are not* copied, if possible.

Reviewer: This should probably go to the new section too. We don't mention constructors for other types.

Author: OK - moved

interfaces defined by [Tables.jl](https://github.com/JuliaData/Tables.jl/) instead.

`DataFrame` is the most fundamental subtype of `AbstractDataFrame`, which stores a set of columns
as `AbstractVector` objects. When a `DataFrame` is constructed columns *are not* copied, if possible.

> The exception is `DataFrame(::DataFrame)` constructor which performs a copy of the columns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The exception is `DataFrame(::AbstractDataFrame)` constructor which performs a copy of the columns.
```

(I am  guessing)

Author: We do not have such a constructor currently .

Reviewer 2: We have `DataFrame(::SubDataFrame)` though right?

Author: Yes - but there it is not possible to run this constructor without copying that is why I have not included it (but now having thought about it I will add `SubDataFrame` for clarity - thanks).

interfaces defined by [Tables.jl](https://github.com/JuliaData/Tables.jl/) instead.

`DataFrame` is the most fundamental subtype of `AbstractDataFrame`, which stores a set of columns
as `AbstractVector` objects. When a `DataFrame` is constructed columns *are not* copied, if possible.
The exception are `DataFrame(::DataFrame)` and `DataFrame(::SubDataFrame)` constructors
which perform a copy of the columns.

From the moment of its construction `DataFrame` assumes *ownership* of its columns. This means that

> methods in DataFrames.jl package assume that columns of the data frame *are not* mutated by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
methods in the DataFrames.jl package assume that columns of the data frame *are not* mutated by
```
Or just
```suggestion
methods in this package assume that columns of the data frame *are not* mutated by
```

> methods other than provided by the DataFrames.jl package that accept this data frame as an argument.

Reviewer: This isn't very clear IMHO.

Author: OK - I have rewritten it. Feel free to correct inline 😄, as this is a hard passage to write.

Reviewer: Actually I'm not sure what you want to say exactly in this sentence. :-)

To me, what "ownership" means here is that:
- resizing column vectors will corrupt the `DataFrame`
- mutating their contents will affect the `DataFrame`, and in particular reordering observations in only one column will make observations (rows) inconsistent and corrupt a child `SubDataFrame`
- modifying grouping column vectors will corrupt a child `GroupedDataFrame`

Additionally, some functions ending with a `!` mutate the column vectors. other are guaranteed not to mutate them.

So I would tend to move the last part with the list here, add the second bullet, and a mention about functions like `sort!` and `dropmissing!`.

Author: I have tried another approach of the description

Reviewer: I've made a proposal. I'm starting to think this should have its own section, as it completely breaks the logic of the presentation of types. Maybe we could put this in the user guide rather than in the API: that's not too technical/repetitive and that's really important for users.

Author: OK - I will move it and we will see how it goes.

In particular, functions that transform a `DataFrame` to produce a new `DataFrame`
always perform a copy of the data. Examples of such functions are [`vcat`](@ref),
[`hcat`](@ref), [`filter`](@ref), [`dropmissing`](@ref), [`join`](@ref), `getindex`,

> `copy` or `DataFrame` constructor mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`copy` or the `DataFrame` constructor mentioned above.
```

A partial exception to this rule are the [`stackdf`](@ref) and [`meltdf`](@ref) functions which create a
`DataFrame` that contains views of the columns from the source `DataFrame`.

It is possible to get a direct access to column `col` of the `DataFrame` `df`
(e.g. in performance critical code to avoid copying), using one of the following methods:

* via the `getproperty` function `df.col`;
* via the `getindex` function using the syntax `df[:col]`;
* by creating `DataFrameColumns` object using the [`eachcol`](@ref) function.

Note that in general a column obtained this way should not be mutated because:

* resizing the column will corrupt the `DataFrame` from which the column was taken;

>   methods in the DataFrames.jl package only check the length of the column when it is added

Reviewer: Not a remark for this PR, but maybe we could add such checks to all/most functions. It shouldn't have a significant performance impact.

Author: Opened https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/issues/1744 to keep track of it.

  to the `DataFrame` and later assume that all columns have the same length;

> * changing values contained in the column is acceptable as long as no `GroupedDataFrame`

Reviewer: More precisely, you should not mutate the grouping columns, right? If so better say it as it makes more sense I think.

Author: fixed

with the exception that they are read only. Note that they are not exported and should not be constructed directly,
but they are columns of a `DataFrame` returned by `stackdf` and `meltdf`.

## The design of handling of columns of a `DataFrame`

When a `DataFrame` is constructed columns are copied by default. You can disable
this behavior by setting `copycolumns` keyword argument to `false`. The exception is
if an `AbstractRange` is passed as a column, then it is always collected to a `Vector`.

Also functions that transform a `DataFrame` to produce a new `DataFrame` perform a copy of the columns,

> unless they are passed `copycolumns` keyword argument set to `false` (available only for functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unless they are passed `copycolumns=false` (available only for functions
```

that could perform a transformation without copying the columns). Examples of such functions are [`vcat`](@ref),
[`hcat`](@ref), [`filter`](@ref), [`dropmissing`](@ref), [`join`](@ref), `getindex`,

> `copy` or the `DataFrame` constructor mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`copy`](@ref) or the [`DataFrame`](@ref) constructor mentioned above.
```

On the contrary, functions that create a view of a `DataFrame` *do not* by definition make copies of
the columns, and therefore require particular caution. This includes `view`, which returns
a `SubDataFrame` or a `DataFrameRow`, and `groupby`, which returns a `GroupedDataFrame`.

A partial exception to this rule are the [`stackdf`](@ref) and [`meltdf`](@ref) functions which
create a `DataFrame` that contains views of the columns from the source `DataFrame`.

In-place functions whose names end with `!` (like `sort!` or [`dropmissing!`](@ref),

> `setindex!`, `setproperty!`) may mutate the column vectors of the `DataFrame` they take

Reviewer: `setproperty!` doesn't mutate column vectors, right?

Also mention `append!` and/or `push!`?

Author: OK (and I will make it more precise)

as an argument. These functions are safe to call due to the rules described above,
*except* when a view of the `DataFrame` is in use (via a `SubDataFrame`, a `DataFrameRow`
or a `GroupedDataFrame`). In the latter case, the view might become corrupted,

> which make trigger errors, silently return invalid data or even cause Julia to crash.

Reviewer 2: my first (incorrect) reading of the paragraph above was that it was not safe to perform those on views.
But those are in-fact most (entirely?) operations that are not possible to perform on views.

Is there an extra sentence that could be added to make it clear that this is mostly (entirely?)
talking about that mutating the original(i.e. parent) dataframe while a view of it exists might corrupt the view

Author: I have added some more explanation

It is possible to have a direct access to a column `col` of a `DataFrame` `df`
(e.g. this can be useful in performance critical code to avoid copying),
using one of the following methods:

* via the `getproperty` function using the syntax `df.col`;

> * via the `getindex` function using the syntax `df[:col]`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* via the `getindex` function using the syntax `df[:col]`; (note this is in contrast to `df[:col, :]` which copies)
```

> * by creating `DataFrameColumns` object using the [`eachcol`](@ref) function;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* by creating a `DataFrameColumns` object using the [`eachcol`](@ref) function;
```

> * by storing the reference to the column before the `DataFrame` was created (note that in general

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* by storing the reference to the column before creating a `DataFrame` with `copycolumns=false`
```
(the the parens can be removed)

> * by storing the reference to the column before creating a `DataFrame` with `copycols=false`;

Reviewer 2: Does `@view df[:col, :]` also get a reference to the column?

Author: indirectly yes, ie. `@view df[:, :col]` is a view of the column, so you could extract a column via `parent` function. I added this case (but it is probably not very likely to happen in practice).

Reviewer 2: Why not overload this case to return a column?
that would be `Base.view(df::DataFrame, ::Colon, col::Symbol) = getproperty(df, col)`,
right?

`@view df[:, :col]` would likely endup being my preferred style if it were permitted.
Since it feels maximally like dealing with an `Array`

Author: The problem is that then `@view` would not be type stable. I.e. if you wrote `@view df[rows, :col]` you would get either a view or a vector.

Note that Base also returns a view when `:` is used:
```
julia> x = [1,2,3]
3-element Array{Int64,1}:
 1
 2
 3

julia> @view x[:]
3-element view(::Array{Int64,1}, :) with eltype Int64:
 1
 2
 3
```

You can think of `view(df, :, :col)` as an equivalent of writing `view(df[:col], :)`.

Reviewer 2: Are you sure what I proposed wouldn't be type stable?
 -   `@view df[rows, :col]` i.e. `view(df, rows, :col)`  would return a `SubDataFrame`  if `rows` was a `AbstractArray`,
 -  `@view df[:, :col]` i.e. `view(df, :, :col)`  would return a `Vector`, and this is fine, because `Colon` is its own type.

Sounds type stable to me. Output type seems like it only depends on the input type.
Though I'm reconsidering its wisdom, since it would be confusing to have that return a different kind of object(`Vector` vs `AbstractDataFrame` subtype) to what `@view df[1:end, :col]` returns.
---

What I actually care about is that 
 `@view df[:, :col]` (i.e. `view(df, :, :col)`), is noncopying.

Which we have right now, right?

Author: > Which we have right now, right?

Right, `@view df[:, :col]` is non copying and will be non-copying (it returns a view).

You are right about type stability :), I was thinking exactly about the difference between  `:` and `1:end` though (which you have spotted anyway 😄).

Also note that `@view df[rows, :col]` returns a `SubArray` not `SubDataFrame` (which is I guess what you would have expected). `SubDataFrame` would be returned if we had multiple columns selected (not one).

Reviewer 2: Ah right,
well a SubArray and a Full array are very similar.
As such my orginal suggestion actually might make sense then.

Though there _should_ be negligable performance difference between a full array view, and the array itself, and there should be no functional difference.

So 🤷‍♂️

Author: I agree - that it why I would leave it as is for now (as this is not directly changed in this PR anyway).

A column obtained from a `DataFrame` using one of the above methods should not be mutated
without caution because:

> * resizing a column vector will corrupt its parent `DataFrame` and associated views (if any):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* resizing a column vector will corrupt its parent `DataFrame` and any associated views:
```

> A column obtained from a `DataFrame` using one of these methods should not be mutated without caution because:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A column obtained from a `DataFrame` using one of the above methods should not be mutated
without caution because:
```

>   methods only check the length of the column when it is added

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  as methods only check the length of the column when it is added
```

  to the `DataFrame` and later assume that all columns have the same length;
* reordering values in a column vector (e.g. using `sort!`) will break the consistency of rows
  with other columns, which will also affect views (if any);

> * changing values contained in a column vector is acceptable as long as it was not used as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* changing values contained in a column vector is acceptable as long as it is not used as
```

unless they are passed `copycols=false` (available only for functions
that could perform a transformation without copying the columns). Examples of such functions are [`vcat`](@ref),
[`hcat`](@ref), [`filter`](@ref), [`dropmissing`](@ref), [`join`](@ref), `getindex`,
[`copy`](@ref) or the [`DataFrame`](@ref) constructor mentioned above.

On the contrary, functions that create a view of a `DataFrame` *do not* by definition make copies of
the columns, and therefore require particular caution. This includes `view`, which returns
a `SubDataFrame` or a `DataFrameRow`, and `groupby`, which returns a `GroupedDataFrame`.

A partial exception to this rule are the [`stackdf`](@ref) and [`meltdf`](@ref) functions which
create a `DataFrame` that contains views of the columns from the source `DataFrame`.

In-place functions whose names end with `!` (like `sort!` or [`dropmissing!`](@ref),
`setindex!`, `push!`, `append!`) may mutate the column vectors of the `DataFrame` they take
as an argument. These functions are safe to call due to the rules described above,
*except* when a view of the `DataFrame` is in use (via a `SubDataFrame`, a `DataFrameRow`

> or a `GroupedDataFrame`). In the latter case (i.e. when you call such a function on the parent of the view),

Reviewer: The "latter case" refers to when you have a view, not to when you modify the parent.
So I'd rather say "In the latter case, calling such a function on the parent might corrupt the view".

BTW, shouldn't the case of `DataFrame` with `copycols=false` be mentioned here too?

Author: OK. I have rephrased it and added the comment about `copycols=false`.

the view might become corrupted, which make trigger errors, silently return invalid data or even cause Julia to crash.

It is possible to have a direct access to a column `col` of a `DataFrame` `df`
(e.g. this can be useful in performance critical code to avoid copying),
using one of the following methods:

* via the `getproperty` function using the syntax `df.col`;

> * via the `getindex` function using the syntax `df[:col]`; (note this is in contrast to `df[:, :col]` which copies)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* via the `getindex` function using the syntax `df[:col]` (note this is in contrast to `df[:, :col]` which copies);
```

* by creating a `DataFrameColumns` object using the [`eachcol`](@ref) function;

> * by calling `parent` function on a view of a column of the `DataFrame`, e.g. `parent(@view(:, :col))`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* by calling `parent` function on a view of a column of the `DataFrame`, e.g. `parent(@view df[:, :col])`;
```

But beyond that perhaps we should say something about:

```
     * Note that you can just work with `@view df[:, :col]` rather than its `paraent` as it itself will be a noncopying complete view
```

Author: @nalimilan - do you think it is worth to add this additional comment (it is true, but it is unrelated and rather advanced topic, so someone who writes such a code should be aware of it so I am a bit hesitant in order to avoid complicating the documentation)?

Author: @oxinabox - thank you for the fix

Reviewer: I agree it's not completely relevant here. That list is already long and complex enough.

Small suggestion:
```suggestion
* by calling the `parent` function on a view of a column of the `DataFrame`, e.g. `parent(@view(:, :col))`;
```

Author: suggestion added

with the exception that they are read only. Note that they are not exported and should not be constructed directly,
but they are columns of a `DataFrame` returned by `stackdf` and `meltdf`.

> ## The design of handling of columns of a `DataFrame`

Author: I have added a section here + a section in the guide.
